## Lancet 2009; 373: 746-58

Published Online January 29, 2009 DOI:10.1016/S01406736(09)60046-5

Correspondence to: A Scuro, 10, 37134, Verona, Italy andrea.cipriani@univr.it

See Comment page 700 Department of Medicine and Public Health, Section of Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology, University of Verona, Italy (A Cipriani PhD, C Barbui MD, Prof M Tansella MD) ; Department of Psychiatry and Cognitive-Behavioral Medicine, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan (Prof T A Furukawa MD, N Watanabe PhD, I M Omori PhD) ; Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina School of Medicine, Greece (G Salanti PhD) ; Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, UK (A Cipriani, Prof J R Geddes MD) ; MRC Biostatistics Unit Institute of Public Health, University of Cambridge, UK (J P T Higgins PhD) ; Cochrane Depression, Anxiety and Neurosis Review Group, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK (H McGuire MA) ; Department of Community based Medicine, University of Bristol, UK (R Churchill PhD) ; and Department of Neuropsychiatry, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan (A Nakagawa MD) Dr Andrea Cipriani, Department of Medicine and Public Health, Section of Psychiatry and Clinical Psychology, University of Verona, Policlinico 'G B Rossi', Piazzale L

For the study protocol see http:// www.psychiatry.univr.it/docs/ Research%20Activities/MTM\_ Protocol.pdf

For the data set see http:// www.psychiatry.univr.it/docs/ Research%20Activities/MTM\_ Analysis.pdf

## Comparative effi cacy and acceptability of 12 new-generation antidepressants: a multiple-treatments meta-analysis

Andrea Cipriani, Toshiaki A Furukawa, Georgia Salanti, John R Geddes, Julian P T Higgins, Rachel Churchill, Norio Watanabe, Atsuo Nakagawa, Ichiro M Omori, Hugh McGuire, Michele Tansella, Corrado Barbui

## Summary

Background Conventional  meta-analyses  have  shown  inconsistent  results for e/uniFB03 cacy of  second-generation antidepressants. We therefore did a multiple-treatments meta-analysis, which accounts for both direct and indirect comparisons, to assess the e/uniFB00  ects of 12 new-generation antidepressants on major depression.

Methods We  systematically  reviewed  117  randomised  controlled  trials  (25 928  participants)  from  1991  up  to Nov 30, 2007, which compared any of the following antidepressants at therapeutic dose range for the acute treatment of  unipolar major depression in adults: bupropion, citalopram, duloxetine, escitalopram, fl  uoxetine, fl  uvoxamine, milnacipran, mirtazapine, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine. The main outcomes were the proportion of patients who responded to or dropped out of the allocated treatment. Analysis was done on an intention-to-treat basis.

Findings Mirtazapine, escitalopram, venlafaxine, and sertraline were signifi  cantly more e/uniFB03 cacious than duloxetine (odds  ratios  [OR]  1·39,  1·33,  1·30  and  1·27,  respectively),  fl  uoxetine  (1·37,  1·32,  1·28,  and  1·25,  respectively), fl  uvoxamine  (1·41,  1·35,  1·30,  and  1·27,  respectively),  paroxetine  (1·35,  1·30,  1·27,  and  1·22,  respectively),  and reboxetine (2·03, 1·95, 1·89, and 1·85, respectively). Reboxetine was signifi  cantly less e/uniFB03 cacious than all the other antidepressants tested. Escitalopram and sertraline showed the best profi  le of acceptability, leading to signifi  cantly fewer discontinuations than did duloxetine, fl  uvoxamine, paroxetine, reboxetine, and venlafaxine.

Interpretation Clinically important di/uniFB00  erences exist between commonly prescribed antidepressants for both e/uniFB03 cacy and acceptability in favour of escitalopram and sertraline. Sertraline might be the best choice when starting treatment for  moderate  to  severe  major  depression  in  adults  because  it  has  the  most  favourable  balance  between  benefi  ts, acceptability, and acquisition cost.

Funding None.

## Introduction

In  the  past  20  years,  several  new  drugs  have  been introduced  for  the  treatment  of  depression,  many  of which are structurally related and share similar putative mechanisms of action. As with statins for the prevention of coronary events, 1 the extent to which these agents vary in terms of e/uniFB03 cacy and acceptability is unclear. Moreover, some of the new drugs are so-called me-too drugs 2 -ie, chemically similar to existing drugs with expiring patents rather  than  genuine  advances  in  treatment.  Systematic reviews  have  already  highlighted  some  di/uniFB00  erences  in e/uniFB03 cacy between second-generation antidepressants. 3-9

We  report  an  overview  of  all  randomised  controlled trials  that  compared 12 new-generation antidepressants in terms of e/uniFB03 cacy and acceptability in the acute-phase treatment of major depression. We used multiple-treatments  meta-analysis, 10 also  known  as  mixed-treatment comparisons  meta-analysis  or  network  meta-analysis, which allows the integration of data from direct (when treatments are compared within a randomised trial) and indirect  comparisons  (when  treatments  are  compared between trials by combining results on how e/uniFB00  ective they are  compared with a common comparator treatment). 11 We aimed to provide a clinically useful summary of the results of the multiple-treatments meta-analysis that can be used to guide treatment decisions.

## Methods

## Study selection and data collection

At  the  beginning  of  this  project,  we  drafted  a  study protocol and subsequently made it freely available to the public  on  our  institutional  website  before  carrying  out the fi  nal analyses. Furthermore, with the publication of this  paper  the  overall  data  set  will  be  in  the  public domain.

For our analysis, we included only randomised controlled trials that compared any of the following 12 new-generation antidepressants (bupropion, citalo  pram, duloxetine, escitalopram, fl  uoxetine, fl  uvoxamine, milnacipran, mirtazapine, paroxetine, reboxetine, sertra  line, and venlafaxine) as  monotherapy  in  the  acute-phase  treatment  of  adults with  unipolar  major  depression.  We  excluded  placebo groups where present and randomised controlled trials of women with post-partum depres  sion. 12

To  identify the relevant  studies,  we  reviewed  the Cochrane collaboration depression, anxiety, and neurosis review  group  controlled  trials  registers  (CCDANDTRstudies and CCDANCTR-references) up to Nov 30, 2007 .

We asked pharmaceutical companies, regulatory agencies, and study investigators to supply all available information.

Two persons within the reviewing team independently reviewed references and abstracts retrieved by the search, assessed the completeness  of  data abstraction,  and confi  rmed  quality  rating.  We  used  a  structured  dataabstraction  form  to  ensure  consistency  of  appraisal  for each  study.  Investigators  were  contacted  and  asked  to provide data to supplement the incomplete reporting of the original articles.

We gave studies a quality rating of adequate, unclear, or inadequate,  according  to  the  adequacy  of  the  random allocation concealment and blinding. 13 Studies that scored adequate  or  unclear  on  these  criteria  were  included  in the fi  nal list.

## Outcome measures

We  defi  ned  acute  treatment  as  8-week  treatment  for both e/uniFB03 cacy and acceptability analyses. 14 If 8-week data were not available, we used data ranging between 6 and 12 weeks (we gave preference to the timepoint given in the original study as the study endpoint). Response and dropout rates were chosen as primary outcomes, being the most consistently reported estimates of acute-treatment  e/uniFB03 cacy  and  acceptability.  We  defi  ned response  as  the  proportion  of  patients  who  had  a reduction of at least 50% from the baseline score on the Hamilton depression rating scale (HDRS) or Montgomery-Åsberg depression rating scale (MADRS), or who scored much improved or very much improved on  the  clinical  global  impression  (CGI)  at  8  weeks. When trials reported results from all three rating scales, we used the HDRS results. Finally, we defi  ned treatment discontinuation (acceptability) as the number of patients who terminated the study early for any reason during the fi  rst 8 weeks of treatment (dropouts).

## Comparability of dosages

In addition to internal and external validity, we assessed the comparability of dosages. Because we could not fi  nd any clear defi  nitions about equivalence of dosages among new-generation antidepressants in the published literature,  we  used  a  modifi  ed  version  of  a  previously published  classifi  cation  described  by  Gartlehner  and colleagues 8 (table  1).  We  employed  this  information  to detect inequalities in dosing that could a/uniFB00  ect comparative e/uniFB03 cacy, and used it in a sensitivity analysis by defi  ning within the therapeutic dose only those studies that used comparable dosages within the predefi  ned range.

## Statistical analysis

We chose a dichotomous primary outcome mainly for clinical reasons. We used both the number of patients who  responded  and  the  number  of  patients  who dropped out to have hard outcome measures of both treatment e/uniFB03 cacy and acceptability. We used response rate instead of a continuous symptom score for e/uniFB03 cacy analysis to make the interpretation of results easier for clinicians. 15 When  dichotomous  e/uniFB03 cacy outcomes were  not reported, but baseline scores,  endpoint means, and standard deviations (SD) of the depression rating scales (such as  HDRS  or  MADRS)  were provided, we estimated the number of patients responding to treatment at 8 weeks (range 6-12 weeks)

Figure 1: Study selection process

<!-- image -->

|              | Range (mg/day)   | Low    | Medium       | High    |
|--------------|------------------|--------|--------------|---------|
| Bupropion    | 150-450          | <337·5 | 337·5-412·5  | >412·5  |
| Citalopram   | 20-60            | <30    | 30-50        | >50     |
| Duloxetine   | 60-100           | <70    | 70-90        | >90     |
| Escitalopram | 10-30            | <15    | 15-25        | >25     |
| Fluoxetine   | 20-60            | <30    | 30-50        | >50     |
| Fluvoxamine  | 50-300           | <75    | 75-125       | >125    |
| Milnacipran  | 50-300           | <75    | 75-125       | >125    |
| Mirtazapine  | 15-45            | <22·5  | 22·5-37·5    | >37·5   |
| Paroxetine   | 20-60            | <30    | 30-50        | >50     |
| Reboxetine   | 4-12             | <5     | 5-9          | >9      |
| Sertraline   | 50-200           | <75    | 75-125       | >125    |
| Venlafaxine  | 75-250           | <156·3 | 156·25-218·7 | >218·75 |

<!-- image -->

*117 randomised controlled trials correspond to 236 arms because two three-arm studies comparing fl  uoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in this multiple-treatments meta-analysis.

|              | Number of trials   | Year of publication   | Year of publication   | Year of publication   | Country   | Country       | Country   | Country   | Country            |
|--------------|--------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------|---------------|-----------|-----------|--------------------|
|              |                    | Earliest              | Median                | Latest                | Europe    | North America | Africa    | Asia      | Multiple countries |
| Bupropion    | 14                 | 1991                  | 2003                  | 2007                  | 1         | 10            | 0         | 0         | 2                  |
| Citalopram   | 16                 | 1993                  | 2002                  | 2007                  | 4         | 4             | 0         | 1         | 4                  |
| Duloxetine   | 8                  | 2002                  | 2006                  | 2007                  | 2         | 5             | 0         | 0         | 1                  |
| Escitalopram | 19                 | 2000                  | 2005                  | 2007                  | 5         | 11            | 0         | 0         | 2                  |
| Fluoxetine   | 54                 | 1991                  | 2000                  | 2007                  | 15        | 13            | 1         | 3         | 6                  |
| Fluvoxamine  | 11                 | 1993                  | 1998                  | 2006                  | 3         | 2             | 0         | 1         | 2                  |
| Milnacipran  | 6                  | 1994                  | 2000                  | 2003                  | 2         | 1             | 0         | 2         | 0                  |
| Mirtazapine  | 13                 | 1997                  | 2002                  | 2005                  | 3         | 3             | 1         | 1         | 5                  |
| Paroxetine   | 32                 | 1993                  | 2001                  | 2007                  | 12        | 13            | 1         | 1         | 2                  |
| Reboxetine   | 8                  | 1997                  | 2003                  | 2006                  | 2         | 2             | 0         | 0         | 1                  |
| Sertraline   | 27                 | 1993                  | 2000                  | 2007                  | 10        | 9             | 0         | 2         | 1                  |
| Venlafaxine  | 28                 | 1994                  | 2002                  | 2007                  | 7         | 5             | 0         | 1         | 6                  |

The number of studies across countries in this table does not match the number of trials included in the review. Missing studies scored as other or not known. *Two three-arm studies comparing fl  uoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review (the total number of arms is 236 and it corresponds to 115 two-arm and two three-arm studies).

Table 2: Studies included in the multiple-treatments meta-analysis

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: Network of eligible comparisons for the multiple-treatment meta-analysis for effi cacy (response rate) The width of the lines is proportional to the number of trials comparing each pair of treatments, and the size of each node is proportional to the number of randomised participants (sample size). The network of eligible comparisons for acceptability (dropout rate) analysis is similar.

with  a  validated  imputation  method. 16 Responders  to treatment  were  calculated  on  an  intention-to-treat basis:  the  analysis  was  based  on  the  total  number  of randomly  assigned  participants,  irrespective  of  how the  original  study  investigators  analysed  the  data.  To carry out a clinically sound  analysis,  we  used  a conservative approach and imputed outcomes for the missing participants assuming  that they did not respond to treatment.

First, we did pair-wise meta-analyses by synthesising 17 studies  that  compared  the  same  interventions  with  a random-e/uniFB00  ects  model 18 to  incorporate  the  assumption that  di/uniFB00  erent  studies  assessed  di/uniFB00  erent,  yet  related, treatment  e/uniFB00  ects. 17 We  used  visual  inspection  of  the forest  plots  to  investigate  the  possibility  of  statistical heterogeneity, and the I 2 statistic. 19 We did the analyses using Stata version 9.

Second,  we  did  a  random-e/uniFB00  ects  model  within  a Bayesian framework using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods in WinBUGS (MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, UK). 11 We modelled the binary outcomes in every treatment group of every study, and specifi  ed the relations  among  the  odds  ratios  (ORs)  across  studies making di/uniFB00  erent comparisons. 10 This method combines direct  and  indirect  evidence  for  any  given  pair  of treatments.  We  used  p  values  less  than  0·05  and 95% CIs (according to whether the CI included the null value) to assess signifi  cance, and looked at a plausible range for the magnitude of the population di/uniFB00  erence. 20 We also assessed the probability that each antidepressant drug was the most e/uniFB03 cacious regimen, the second best, the third best, and so on, by calculating the OR for each drug  compared  with  an  arbitrary  common  control group, and counting the proportion of iterations of the Markov chain in which each drug had the highest OR, the second highest, and so on. We ranked treatments in terms of acceptability with the same methods.

A key assumption behind multiple-treatments metaanalysis  is  that  the  analysed  network  is  coherent-ie, that direct and indirect evidence on the same comparisons do not disagree beyond chance. To estimate  incoherence,  we  calculated  the  ratio  of  odds ratios  for  indirect  versus  direct  evidence  whenever indirect  estimates  could  be  constructed  with  a  single common  comparator.  We  defi  ned  incoherence  as  the disagreement between direct and indirect evidence with a 95% CI excluding 1.

Finally, we looked at comparative e/uniFB03 cacy among the 12  antidepressant  drugs.  We  expressed  these  using fl   uoxetine  as  reference  drug,  because  it  was  the  fi  rst among  these  12  antidepressants  to  be  marketed  in Europe and the USA, and it has been consistently used as reference drug among the di/uniFB00  erent pair-wise comparisons.

We did sensitivity analyses according to the following variables: dose (including only studies within the therapeutic  range)  and  imputation  (including  only studies without imputation). To investigate the e/uniFB00  ect of sponsorship  on  outcome  estimate,  we  carried  out  a meta-regression analysis.

## Role of the funding source

No  drug  manufacturing  company  was  involved  in  the study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, writing of the report, or in the decision to submit the report for publication. All authors saw and

|                 | Numberof studies   | Numberof patients   | Efficacy                                     |                  | Acceptability                             |                  |
|-----------------|--------------------|---------------------|----------------------------------------------|------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------|
|                 |                    |                     | Response rate (responders/ total randomised) | OR (95%CI)       | Dropout rate (dropouts/ total randomised) | OR (95%CI)       |
| Bupropion vs    |                    |                     |                                              |                  |                                           |                  |
| Escitalopram    | 3                  | 842                 | 163/279 vs 172/287                           | 0·93 (0·60-1·45) | 105/417 vs 109/425                        | 0·98 (0·72-1·34) |
| Fluoxetine      | 3                  | 740                 | 187/369 vs 206/371                           | 0·82 (0·62-1·10) | 134/369 vs 134/371                        | 1·01 (0·75-1·36) |
| Paroxetine      | 2                  | 240                 | 34/48 vs 40/52                               | 0·73 (0·30-1·79) | 22/117 vs 26/123                          | 0·86 (0·45-1·63) |
| Sertraline      | 3                  | 727                 | 237/364 vs 231/363                           | 1·07 (0·79-1·45) | 63/242 vs 82/237                          | 0·66 (0·38-1·16) |
| Venlafaxine     | 3                  | 1127                | 307/563 vs 329/564                           | 0·85 (0·63-1·16) | 150/563 vs 152/564                        | 0·99 (0·76-1·31) |
| Citalopram vs   |                    |                     |                                              |                  |                                           |                  |
| Escitalopram    | 5                  | 1604                | 319/622 vs 426/725                           | 0·68 (0·53-0·87) | 127/750 vs 141/854                        | 1·17 (0·83-1·64) |
| Fluoxetine      | 3                  | 740                 | 216/364 vs 219/376                           | 1·05 (0·77-1·43) | 75/364 vs 68/376                          | 1·17 (0·80-1·70) |
| Fluvoxamine     | 1                  | 217                 | 33/108 vs 31/109                             | 1·11 (0·62-1·98) | 22/108 vs 29/109                          | 0·71 (0·37-1·33) |
| Mirtazapine     | 1                  | 270                 | 117/133 vs 116/137                           | 1·32 (0·66-2·66) | 8/133 vs 18/137                           | 0·42 (0·18-1·01) |
| Paroxetine      | 1                  | 406                 | 77/199 vs 102/207                            | 1·54 (1·04-2·28) | 41/199 vs 43/207                          | 1·01 (0·62-1·63) |
| Reboxetine      | 2                  | 451                 | 145/227 vs 110/224                           | 1·72 (1·01-2·93) | 51/227 vs 73/224                          | 0·86 (0·22-3·46) |
| Sertraline      | 2                  | 615                 | 139/200 vs 136/200                           | 0·93 (0·61-1·42) | 60/307 vs 82/308                          | 0·67 (0·46-0·98) |
| Venlafaxine     | 1                  | 151                 | 50/75 vs 49/76                               | 1·10 (0·56-2·16) | ··                                        | ··               |
| Duloxetine vs   |                    |                     |                                              |                  |                                           |                  |
| Escitalopram    | 3                  | 1120                | 260/562 vs 286/558                           | 0·77 (0·52-1·13) | 131/411 vs 87/414                         | 1·93 (0·99-3·77) |
| Fluoxetine      | 1                  | 103                 | 32/70 vs 15/33                               | 1·01 (0·44-2·32) | 24/70 vs 12/33                            | 0·91 (0·38-2·16) |
| Paroxetine      | 4                  | 1095                | 398/736 vs 200/359                           | 0·91 (0·61-1·35) | 171/736 vs 90/359                         | 0·91 (0·67-1·24) |
| Escitalopram vs |                    |                     |                                              |                  |                                           |                  |
| Bupropion       | 3                  | 842                 | 172/287 vs 163/279                           | 1·07 (0·69-1·67) | 109/425 vs 105/417                        | 1·02 (0·75-1·39) |
| Citalopram      | 5                  | 1604                | 426/725 vs 319/622                           | 1·47 (1·15-1·90) | 141/854 vs 127/750                        | 0·86 (0·61-1·20) |
| Duloxetine      | 3                  | 1120                | 286/558 vs 260/562                           | 1·30 (0·88-1·91) | 87/414 vs 131/411                         | 0·52 (0·26-1·01) |
| Fluoxetine      | 2                  | 543                 | 143/276 vs 126/267                           | 1·23 (0·87-1·74) | 66/276 vs 68/267                          | 0·98 (0·37-2·56) |
| Paroxetine      | 2                  | 784                 | 274/398 vs 255/386                           | 1·12 (0·76-1·65) | 40/398 vs 50/386                          | 0·75 (0·48-1·17) |
| Sertraline      | 2                  | 489                 | 144/243 vs 152/246                           | 0·90 (0·62-1·30) | 47/243 vs 40/246                          | 1·24 (0·77-1·97) |
| Venlafaxine     | 2                  | 495                 | 172/249 vs 160/246                           | 1·21 (0·69-2·11) | 52/249 vs 56/246                          | 0·90 (0·58-1·39) |
| Fluoxetine* vs  |                    |                     |                                              |                  |                                           |                  |
| Bupropion       | 3                  | 740                 | 206/371 vs 187/369                           | 1·21 (0·91-1·62) | 134/371 vs 134/369                        | 0·99 (0·73-1·34) |
| Citalopram      | 3                  | 740                 | 219/376 vs 216/364                           | 0·95 (0·70-1·29) | 68/376 vs 75/364                          | 0·86 (0·59-1·25) |
| Duloxetine      | 1                  | 103                 | 15/33 vs 32/70                               | 0·99 (0·43-2·27) | 12/33 vs 24/70                            | 1·09 (0·46-2·60) |
| Escitalopram    | 2                  | 543                 | 126/267 vs 143/276                           | 0·81 (0·57-1·15) | 68/267 vs 66/276                          | 1·02 (0·39-2·67) |
| Fluvoxamine     | 2                  | 284                 | 83/143 vs 83/141                             | 0·97 (0·60-1·55) | 28/143 vs 31/141                          | 0·85 (0·48-1·52) |
| Milnacipran     | 3                  | 560                 | 106/224 vs 156/336                           | 1·15 (0·72-1·85) | 83/224 vs 138/336                         | 0·98 (0·68-1·42) |
| Mirtazapine     | 5                  | 622                 | 176/316 vs 200/306                           | 0·65 (0·45-0·93) | 48/164 vs 50/159                          | 0·92 (0·56-1·49) |
| Paroxetine*     | 13                 | 2806                | 771/1287 vs 740/1277                         | 1·01 (0·82-1·24) | 447/1406 vs 468/1400                      | 0·93 (0·79-1·09) |
| Reboxetine      | 4                  | 764                 | 204/387 vs 168/377                           | 1·39 (0·93-2·09) | 98/387 vs 126/377                         | 0·68 (0·49-0·94) |
| Sertraline*     | 8                  | 1352                | 344/666 vs 406/686                           | 0·70 (0·56-0·88) | 151/546 vs 135/568                        | 1·25 (0·88-1·77) |
| Venlafaxine     | 12                 | 2446                | 607/1126 vs 679/1116                         | 0·74 (0·62-0·88) | 290/1226 vs 302/1220                      | 0·94 (0·78-1·13) |
|                 |                    |                     |                                              |                  | (Continues on                             | (Continues on    |

approved  the  fi  nal  version  of  the  manuscript.  The corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had fi  nal responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

## Results

The electronic searches yielded 345 potentially relevant studies,  of  which  274  potentially  eligible  articles  were analysed.  We  excluded  172  reports  that  did  not  meet eligibility criteria (fi  gure 1).  We  identifi  ed  a  further 15 unpublished trials eligible for our meta-analysis from pharmaceutical industry websites. Overall, we  used 117 trials from 1991 to 2007 for the multiple-treatments meta-analysis. 21-137 Most trials  (63%) were carried out in North America and Europe (table 2). Overall, 25 928 individuals were randomly assigned to one of the 12 antidepressant drugs and  were  included in the multiple-treatments  meta-analysis.  About  two-thirds  of

|                                | Numberof studies               | Numberof patients              | Efficacy                                     |                                | Acceptability                             |                                |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
|                                |                                |                                | Response rate (responders/ total randomised) | OR (95%CI)                     | Dropout rate (dropouts/ total randomised) | OR (95%CI)                     |
| (Continued from previous page) | (Continued from previous page) | (Continued from previous page) | (Continued from previous page)               | (Continued from previous page) | (Continued from previous page)            | (Continued from previous page) |
| Fluvoxamine vs                 | Fluvoxamine vs                 | Fluvoxamine vs                 | Fluvoxamine vs                               | Fluvoxamine vs                 | Fluvoxamine vs                            | Fluvoxamine vs                 |
| Citalopram                     | 1                              | 217                            | 31/109 vs 33/108                             | 0·90 (0·50-1·62)               | 29/109 vs 22/108                          | 1·42 (0·75-2·66)               |
| Fluoxetine                     | 2                              | 284                            | 83/141 vs 83/143                             | 1·03 (0·64-1·66)               | 31/141 vs 28/143                          | 1·17 (0·66-2·09)               |
| Milnacipran                    | 1                              | 113                            | 32/56 vs 40/57                               | 0·57 (0·26-1·23)               | 17/56 vs 15/57                            | 1·22 (0·54-2·77)               |
| Mirtazapine                    | 1                              | 412                            | 127/207 vs 132/205                           | 0·88 (0·59-1·31)               | 41/207 vs 47/205                          | 0·83 (0·52-1·33)               |
| Paroxetine                     | 3                              | 281                            | 72/143 vs 77/138                             | 0·83 (0·51-1·34)               | 42/143 vs 38/138                          | 1·08 (0·62-1·85)               |
| Sertraline                     | 2                              | 185                            | 48/89 vs 49/96                               | 1·21 (0·53-2·75)               | 22/89 vs 12/96                            | 1·47 (0·19-11·11)              |
| Venlafaxine                    | 1                              | 111                            | 14/34 vs 48/77                               | 0·42 (0·19-0·96)               | 13/34 vs 18/77                            | 2·03 (0·85-4·84)               |
| Milnacipran vs                 | Milnacipran vs                 | Milnacipran vs                 | Milnacipran vs                               | Milnacipran vs                 | Milnacipran vs                            | Milnacipran vs                 |
| Fluoxetine                     | 3                              | 560                            | 156/336 vs 106/224                           | 0·87 (0·54-1·39)               | 138/336 vs 83/224                         | 1·02 (0·71-1·46)               |
| Fluvoxamine                    | 1                              | 113                            | 40/57 vs 32/56                               | 1·76 (0·81-3·83)               | 15/57 vs 17/56                            | 0·82 (0·36-1·86)               |
| Paroxetine                     | 1                              | 302                            | 74/149 vs 78/153                             | 0·95 (0·60-1·49)               | 29/149 vs 33/153                          | 0·88 (0·50-1·54)               |
| Sertraline                     | 1                              | 53                             | 4/27 vs 2/26                                 | 2·08 (0·35-12·5)               | 15/27 vs 11/26                            | 1·70 (0·57-5·05)               |
| Mirtazapine vs                 | Mirtazapine vs                 | Mirtazapine vs                 | Mirtazapine vs                               | Mirtazapine vs                 | Mirtazapine vs                            | Mirtazapine vs                 |
| Citalopram                     | 1                              | 270                            | 116/137 vs 117/133                           | 0·76 (0·38-1·52)               | 18/137 vs 8/133                           | 2·36 (0·99-5·65)               |
| Fluoxetine                     | 5                              | 622                            | 200/306 vs 176/316                           | 1·55 (1·07-2·23)               | 50/159 vs 48/164                          | 1·09 (0·67-1·78)               |
| Fluvoxamine                    | 1                              | 412                            | 132/205 vs 127/207                           | 1·14 (0·76-1·70)               | 47/205 vs 41/207                          | 1·20 (0·75-1·93)               |
| Paroxetine                     | 3                              | 726                            | 184/366 vs 160/360                           | 1·27 (0·94-1·70)               | 99/366 vs 110/360                         | 0·84 (0·60-1·16)               |
| Sertraline                     | 1                              | 346                            | 117/176 vs 114/170                           | 0·97 (0·62-1·52)               | 41/176 vs 32/170                          | 1·31 (0·78-2·20)               |
| Venlafaxine                    | 2                              | 415                            | 113/208 vs 91/207                            | 1·53 (1·03-2·25)               | 57/208 vs 75/207                          | 0·66 (0·44-1·01)               |
| Paroxetine* vs                 | Paroxetine* vs                 | Paroxetine* vs                 | Paroxetine* vs                               | Paroxetine* vs                 | Paroxetine* vs                            | Paroxetine* vs                 |
| Bupropion                      | 2                              | 240                            | 40/52 vs 34/48                               | 1·37 (0·56-3·36)               | 26/123 vs 22/117                          | 1·16 (0·61-2·20)               |
| Citalopram                     | 1                              | 406                            | 77/199 vs 102/207                            | 0·65 (0·44-0·96)               | 41/199 vs 43/207                          | 0·99 (0·61-1·60)               |
| Duloxetine                     | 4                              | 1095                           | 200/359 vs 398/736                           | 1·10 (0·74-1·63)               | 90/359 vs 171/736                         | 1·10 (0·81-1·50)               |
| Escitalopram                   | 2                              | 784                            | 255/386 vs 274/398                           | 0·89 (0·61-1·32)               | 50/386 vs 40/398                          | 1·33 (0·85-2·07)               |
| Fluoxetine*                    | 13                             | 2806                           | 740/1277 vs 771/1287                         | 0·99 (0·85-1·22)               | 468/1400 vs 447/1406                      | 1·08 (0·92-1·26)               |
| Fluvoxamine                    | 3                              | 281                            | 77/138 vs 72/143                             | 1·20 (0·74-1·96)               | 38/138 vs 42/143                          | 0·93 (0·54-1·60)               |
| Milnacipran                    | 1                              | 302                            | 78/153 vs 74/149                             | 1·05 (0·67-1·65)               | 33/153 vs 29/149                          | 1·14 (0·65-1·99)               |
| Mirtazapine                    | 3                              | 726                            | 160/360 vs 184/366                           | 0·79 (0·59-1·06)               | 110/360 vs 99/366                         | 1·19 (0·86-1·65)               |
| Sertraline*                    | 4                              | 664                            | 204/325 vs 241/339                           | 0·57 (0·30-1·07)               | 75/325 vs 69/339                          | 1·47 (0·65-3·33)               |
| Venlafaxine                    | 1                              | 361                            | 105/178 vs 113/183                           | 0·89 (0·58-1·36)               | 52/178 vs 47/183                          | 1·19 (0·75-1·90)               |
| Reboxetine vs                  | Reboxetine vs                  | Reboxetine vs                  | Reboxetine vs                                | Reboxetine vs                  | Reboxetine vs                             | Reboxetine vs                  |
| Citalopram                     | 2                              | 451                            | 110/224 vs 145/227                           | 0·58 (0·34-0·99)               | 73/224 vs 51/227                          | 1·16 (0·29-4·63)               |
| Fluoxetine                     | 4                              | 764                            | 168/377 vs 204/387                           | 0·72 (0·48-1·08)               | 126/377 vs 98/387                         | 1·47 (1·07-2·02)               |
| Sertraline                     | 1                              | 48                             | 16/25 vs 17/24                               | 0·73 (0·22-2·43)               | 5/25 vs 3/24                              | 1·75 (0·37-8·33)               |
| Venlafaxine                    | 1                              | 107                            | 32/57 vs 37/50                               | 0·45 (0·20-1·02)               | 7/57 vs 7/50                              | 0·86 (0·28-2·65)               |
|                                |                                |                                |                                              |                                |                                           | (Continues on next page)       |

participants (64%) were women. 24 595 were included in the  e/uniFB03 cacy  analysis  (111  studies)  and  24 693  in  the acceptability analysis (112 studies). The mean duration of the studies was 8·1 weeks and the mean sample size was 109·8  participants  per  group  (range  9-357),  62  trials having  at  least  100  participants  per  group.  85  studies were two-arm trials;  23  were  three-arm  trials  involving two di/uniFB00  erent active comparisons and placebo; seven were multi-arm  trials  involving  two  active  compounds  at various fi  xed dosages and placebo; and two were three-arm trials with three di/uniFB00  erent  active  comparisons. 61,62

Only 14 studies (comparing all included antidepressants except  fl  uvoxamine  and  milnacipran)  had  a  follow-up longer  than  12  weeks.  We  obtained  supplementary information about outcome data from the investigators for  42  of  the  included  studies.  In  terms  of  clinical characteristics,  53  studies  (9321  participants)  included individuals aged 65 years or younger (eight recruited only individuals older than 65, n=1583), and 87 were carried out  in  outpatient  clinics  (seven  in  primary  care).  The overall mean baseline score at study entry was 23·47 (SD 4·27) for HDRS-17, 25·72 (4·62) for HDRS-21,

|                                                                                                                                                                     | Numberof studies                                                                                                                                                    | Numberof patients                                                                                                                                                   | Efficacy                                                                                                                                                            | Efficacy                                                                                                                                                            | Acceptability                                                                                                                                                       | Acceptability                                                                                                                                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                     | Response rate (responders/ total randomised)                                                                                                                        | OR (95%CI)                                                                                                                                                          | Dropout rate (dropouts/ total randomised)                                                                                                                           | OR (95%CI)                                                                                                                                                          |
| (Continued from previous page)                                                                                                                                      | (Continued from previous page)                                                                                                                                      | (Continued from previous page)                                                                                                                                      | (Continued from previous page)                                                                                                                                      | (Continued from previous page)                                                                                                                                      | (Continued from previous page)                                                                                                                                      | (Continued from previous page)                                                                                                                                      |
| Sertraline* vs                                                                                                                                                      | Sertraline* vs                                                                                                                                                      | Sertraline* vs                                                                                                                                                      | Sertraline* vs                                                                                                                                                      | Sertraline* vs                                                                                                                                                      | Sertraline* vs                                                                                                                                                      | Sertraline* vs                                                                                                                                                      |
| Bupropion                                                                                                                                                           | 3                                                                                                                                                                   | 727                                                                                                                                                                 | 231/363 vs 237/364                                                                                                                                                  | 0·93 (0·69-1·27)                                                                                                                                                    | 82/237 vs 63/242                                                                                                                                                    | 1·51 (0·86-2·64)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Citalopram                                                                                                                                                          | 2                                                                                                                                                                   | 615                                                                                                                                                                 | 139/200 vs 136/200                                                                                                                                                  | 1·07 (0·70-1·64)                                                                                                                                                    | 82/308 vs 60/307                                                                                                                                                    | 1·49 (1·02-2·18)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Escitalopram                                                                                                                                                        | 2                                                                                                                                                                   | 489                                                                                                                                                                 | 152/246 vs 144/243                                                                                                                                                  | 1·12 (0·77-1·61)                                                                                                                                                    | 40/246 vs 47/243                                                                                                                                                    | 0·81 (0·51-1·29)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Fluoxetine*                                                                                                                                                         | 8                                                                                                                                                                   | 1352                                                                                                                                                                | 406/686 vs 344/666                                                                                                                                                  | 1·42 (1·13-1·78)                                                                                                                                                    | 135/568 vs 151/546                                                                                                                                                  | 0·80 (0·56-1·14)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Fluvoxamine                                                                                                                                                         | 2                                                                                                                                                                   | 185                                                                                                                                                                 | 49/96 vs 48/89                                                                                                                                                      | 0·83 (0·36-1·88)                                                                                                                                                    | 12/96 vs 22/89                                                                                                                                                      | 0·68 (0·09-5·15)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Milnacipran                                                                                                                                                         | 1                                                                                                                                                                   | 53                                                                                                                                                                  | 2/26 vs 4/27                                                                                                                                                        | 0·48 (0·08-2·87)                                                                                                                                                    | 11/26 vs 15/27                                                                                                                                                      | 0·59 (0·20-1·74)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Mirtazapine                                                                                                                                                         | 1                                                                                                                                                                   | 346                                                                                                                                                                 | 114/170 vs 117/176                                                                                                                                                  | 1·03 (0·66-1·61)                                                                                                                                                    | 32/170 vs 41/176                                                                                                                                                    | 0·76 (0·45-1·28)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Paroxetine*                                                                                                                                                         | 4                                                                                                                                                                   | 664                                                                                                                                                                 | 241/339 vs 204/325                                                                                                                                                  | 1·76 (0·93-3·32)                                                                                                                                                    | 69/339 vs 75/325                                                                                                                                                    | 0·68 (0·30-1·54)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Reboxetine                                                                                                                                                          | 1                                                                                                                                                                   | 48                                                                                                                                                                  | 17/24 vs 16/25                                                                                                                                                      | 1·37 (0·41-4·54)                                                                                                                                                    | 3/24 vs 5/25                                                                                                                                                        | 0·57 (0·12-2·71)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Venlafaxine                                                                                                                                                         | 5                                                                                                                                                                   | 611                                                                                                                                                                 | 177/303 vs 190/308                                                                                                                                                  | 0·87 (0·59-1·29)                                                                                                                                                    | 49/303 vs 70/308                                                                                                                                                    | 0·56 (0·24-1·33)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Venlafaxine vs                                                                                                                                                      | Venlafaxine vs                                                                                                                                                      | Venlafaxine vs                                                                                                                                                      | Venlafaxine vs                                                                                                                                                      | Venlafaxine vs                                                                                                                                                      | Venlafaxine vs                                                                                                                                                      | Venlafaxine vs                                                                                                                                                      |
| Bupropion                                                                                                                                                           | 3                                                                                                                                                                   | 1127                                                                                                                                                                | 329/564 vs 307/563                                                                                                                                                  | 1·17 (0·86-1·59)                                                                                                                                                    | 152/564 vs 150/563                                                                                                                                                  | 1·00 (0·76-1·32)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Citalopram                                                                                                                                                          | 1                                                                                                                                                                   | 151                                                                                                                                                                 | 49/76 vs 50/75                                                                                                                                                      | 0·91 (0·46-1·78)                                                                                                                                                    | ··                                                                                                                                                                  | ··                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Escitalopram                                                                                                                                                        | 2                                                                                                                                                                   | 495                                                                                                                                                                 | 160/246 vs 172/249                                                                                                                                                  | 0·82 (0·47-1·44)                                                                                                                                                    | 56/246 vs 52/249                                                                                                                                                    | 1·12 (0·72-1·73)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Fluoxetine                                                                                                                                                          | 12                                                                                                                                                                  | 2446                                                                                                                                                                | 679/1116 vs 607/1126                                                                                                                                                | 1·36 (1·14-1·62)                                                                                                                                                    | 302/1220 vs 290/1226                                                                                                                                                | 1·07 (0·88-1·29)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Fluvoxamine                                                                                                                                                         | 1                                                                                                                                                                   | 111                                                                                                                                                                 | 48/77 vs 14/34                                                                                                                                                      | 2·36 (1·04-5·38)                                                                                                                                                    | 18/77 vs 13/34                                                                                                                                                      | 0·49 (0·21-1·18)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Mirtazapine                                                                                                                                                         | 2                                                                                                                                                                   | 415                                                                                                                                                                 | 91/207 vs 113/208                                                                                                                                                   | 0·65 (0·44-0·97)                                                                                                                                                    | 75/207 vs 57/208                                                                                                                                                    | 1·50 (0·99-2·29)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Paroxetine                                                                                                                                                          | 1                                                                                                                                                                   | 361                                                                                                                                                                 | 113/183 vs 105/178                                                                                                                                                  | 1·12 (0·74-1·71)                                                                                                                                                    | 47/183 vs 52/178                                                                                                                                                    | 0·84 (0·53-1·33)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Reboxetine                                                                                                                                                          | 1                                                                                                                                                                   | 107                                                                                                                                                                 | 37/50 vs 32/57                                                                                                                                                      | 2·22 (0·98-5·05)                                                                                                                                                    | 7/50 vs 7/57                                                                                                                                                        | 1·16 (0·39-3·58)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Sertraline                                                                                                                                                          | 5                                                                                                                                                                   | 611                                                                                                                                                                 | 190/308 vs 177/303                                                                                                                                                  | 1·15 (0·78-1·69)                                                                                                                                                    | 70/308 vs 49/303                                                                                                                                                    | 1·78 (0·75-4·18)                                                                                                                                                    |
| OR=odds ratio. Vs=versus. CI=confidence interval. *Twothree-arm studies comparing fluoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review. | OR=odds ratio. Vs=versus. CI=confidence interval. *Twothree-arm studies comparing fluoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review. | OR=odds ratio. Vs=versus. CI=confidence interval. *Twothree-arm studies comparing fluoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review. | OR=odds ratio. Vs=versus. CI=confidence interval. *Twothree-arm studies comparing fluoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review. | OR=odds ratio. Vs=versus. CI=confidence interval. *Twothree-arm studies comparing fluoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review. | OR=odds ratio. Vs=versus. CI=confidence interval. *Twothree-arm studies comparing fluoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review. | OR=odds ratio. Vs=versus. CI=confidence interval. *Twothree-arm studies comparing fluoxetine with paroxetine and sertraline were included in the systematic review. |

and 30·09 (4·64) for MADRS. Most trials were rated as unclear  according  to  our  quality  assessment  and  only 12 were rated as adequate. Figure 2 shows the network of eligible comparisons for the multiple-treatments meta-analysis. Of the 66 possible pair-wise comparisons between the 12 treatments, 42 have been studied directly in one or more trials for e/uniFB03 cacy and 41 for acceptability.

We did direct comparisons (table 3), showing that e/uniFB03 cacy favours  escitalopram  over  citalopram;  citalopram  over reboxetine  and  paroxetine;  mirtazapine  over  fl  uoxetine and venlafaxine; sertraline over fl  uoxetine; and venlafaxine over fl  uoxetine and fl  uvoxamine. These results arise from 42 independent analyses without adjustment for multiple testing (ie, about two CIs would be expected to exclude 1 by chance alone). For dropouts, fl  uoxetine was better tolerated than reboxetine, and citalopram than sertraline.

Overall, heterogeneity was moderate, although for most comparisons  the  95%  CI  included  values  that  showed very high  or no  heterogeneity, refl  ecting the  small number of included studies for each pair-wise comparison. In the meta-analyses of direct comparisons, we found I 2 values higher than 75% for the comparisons citalopram and reboxetine ( I 2 =85·0%), and escitalopram and fl  uoxetine ( I 2 =82·7%). In both cases, only two studies were included in the meta-analysis.

Figure  3  summarises  the  results  of  the  multipletreatments  meta-analysis.  Escitalopram,  mirtazapine, sertraline, and  venlafaxine were  signifi  cantly  more e/uniFB03 cacious  than  duloxetine,  fl  uoxetine, fl   uvoxamine, paroxetine,  and  reboxetine  (even  though  less  clear benefi  ts were noted with sertraline than with escitalopram, venlafaxine, and mirtazapine when comparing with duloxetine  and  fl  uvoxamine,  with  the credibility interval for OR  slightly more than 1). Reboxetine was signifi  cantly less e/uniFB03 cacious than all the other  11  antidepressants.  These  fi  ndings  arise  from 66 simultaneous comparisons and about three statistically  signifi  cant  fi  ndings  might  be  expected  by chance alone. In terms of acceptability, duloxetine and paroxetine  were  less  well  tolerated  than  escitalopram and  sertraline;  fl  uvoxamine  less  well  tolerated  than citalopram,  escitalopram,  and  sertraline;  venlafaxine less  well  tolerated  than  escitalopram;  reboxetine  less well tolerated than many other antidepressants, such as bupropion,  citalopram,  escitalopram,  fl  uoxetine,  and sertraline; and escitalopram and sertraline were better tolerated than duloxetine, fl  uvoxamine, paroxetine, and reboxetine (fi  gure 3).

Mirtazapine,  escitalopram,  venlafaxine,  and  sertraline were more e/uniFB03 cacious than fl  uoxetine, and fl  uoxetine was

Figure 3: Effi cacy and acceptability of the 12 antidepressants

<!-- image -->

| Efficacy (response rate) (95%CI)   | Efficacy (response rate) (95%CI)   | Efficacy (response rate) (95%CI)   | Comparison       | Comparison       | Acceptability (dropout rate) (95%CI)   | Acceptability (dropout rate) (95%CI)   | Acceptability (dropout rate) (95%CI)   | Acceptability (dropout rate) (95%CI)   |                  |                  |                  |
|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| BUP                                | 1·00 (0·78-1·28)                   | 0·75 (0·55-1·01)                   | 1·06 (0·86-1·32) | 0·89 (0·74-1·08) | 0·73 (0·53-1·00)                       | 0·87 (0·58-1·24)                       | 0·87 (0·66-1·14)                       | 0·81 (0·65-1·00)                       | 0·62 (0·45-0·86) | 1·01 (0·82-1·27) | 0·84 (0·68-1·02) |
| 0·98 (0·78-1·23)                   | CIT                                | 0·75 (0·55-1·02)                   | 1·07 (0·86-1·31) | 0·90 (0·73-1·09) | 0·73 (0·54-0·99)                       | 0·87 (0·60-1·24)                       | 0·87 (0·66-1·15)                       | 0·81 (0·65-1·01)                       | 0·62 (0·45-0·84) | 1·02 (0·81-1·28) | 0·84 (0·67-1·06) |
| 1·09 (0·83-1·43)                   | 1·12 (0·87-1·44)                   | DUL                                | 1·43 (1·09-1·85) | 1·19 (0·91-1·57) | 0·98 (0·67-1·41)                       | 1·16 (0·77-1·73)                       | 1·16 (0·83-1·61)                       | 1·08 (0·84-1·40)                       | 0·83 (0·57-1·22) | 1·36 (1·01-1·83) | 1·12 (0·84-1·50) |
| 0·82 (0·67-1·01)                   | 0·84 (0·70-1·01)                   | 0·75 (0·60-0·93)                   | ESC              | 0·84 (0·70-1·01) | 0·69 (0·50-0·94)                       | 0·81 (0·55-1·15)                       | 0·81 (0·62-1·07)                       | 0·76 (0·62-0·93)                       | 0·58 (0·43-0·81) | 0·95 (0·77-1·19) | 0·78 (0·64-0·97) |
| 1·08 (0·90-1·29)                   | 1·10 (0·93-1·31)                   | 0·99 (0·79-1·24)                   | 1·32 (1·12-1·55) | FLU              | 0·82 (0·62-1·07)                       | 0·97 (0·69-1·32)                       | 0·97 (0·77-1·21)                       | 0·91 (0·79-1·05)                       | 0·70 (0·53-0·92) | 1·14 (0·96-1·36) | 0·94 (0·81-1·09) |
| 1·10 (0·83-1·47)                   | 1·13 (0·86-1·47)                   | 1·01 (0·74-1·38)                   | 1·35 (1·02-1·76) | 1·02 (0·81-1·30) | FVX                                    | 1·18 (0·76-1·75)                       | 1·18 (0·87-1·61)                       | 1·10 (0·84-1·47)                       | 0·85 (0·57-1·26) | 1·38 (1·03-1·89) | 1·14 (0·86-1·54) |
| 1·07 (0·77-1·48)                   | 1·09 (0·78-1·50)                   | 0·97 (0·69-1·38)                   | 1·30 (0·95-1·78) | 0·99 (0·74-1·31) | 0·97 (0·68-1·37)                       | MIL                                    | 0·99 (0·69-1·53)                       | 0·94 (0·68-1·31)                       | 0·72 (0·48-1·10) | 1·17 (0·84-1·72) | 0·97 (0·69-1·40) |
| 0·79 (0·72-1·00)                   | 0·80 (0·63-1·01)                   | 0·72 (0·54-0·94)                   | 0·96 (0·76-1·19) | 0·73 (0·60-0·88) | 0·71 (0·55-0·92)                       | 0·74 (0·53-1·01)                       | MIR                                    | 0·93 (0·75-1·17)                       | 0·72 (0·51-1·03) | 1·17 (0·91-1·51) | 0·97 (0·76-1·23) |
| 1·06 (0·87-1·30)                   | 1·08 (0·90-1·30)                   | 0·97 (0·78-1·20)                   | 1·30 (1·10-1·53) | 0·98 (0·86-1·12) | 0·96 (0·76-1·23)                       | 1·00 (0·74-1·33)                       | 1·35 (1·11-1·64)                       | PAR                                    | 0·77 (0·56-1·05) | 1·25 (1·04-1·52) | 1·03 (0·86-1·24) |
| 1·60 (1·20-2·16)                   | 1·63 (1·25-2·14)                   | 1·46 (1·05-2·02)                   | 1·95 (1·47-2·59) | 1·48 (1·16-1·90) | 1·45 (1·03-2·02)                       | 1·50 (1·03-2·18)                       | 2·03 (1·52-2·78)                       | 1·50 (1·16-1·98)                       | REB              | 1·63 (1·19-2·24) | 1·34 (0·99-1·83) |
| 0·87 (0·72-1·05)                   | 0·88 (0·72-1·07)                   | 0·79 (0·62-1·01)                   | 1·06 (0·88-1·27) | 0·80 (0·69-0·93) | 0·79 (0·61-1·01)                       | 0·81 (0·60-1·11)                       | 1·10 (0·90-1·36)                       | 0·82 (0·69-0·96)                       | 0·54 (0·41-0·71) | SER              | 0·82 (0·67-1·00) |
| 0·85 (0·70-1·01)                   | 0·86 (0·71-1·05)                   | 0·77 (0·60-0·99)                   | 1·03 (0·86-1·24) | 0·78 (0·68-0·90) | 0·77 (0·59-0·99)                       | 0·79 (0·58-1·08)                       | 1·08 (0·87-1·33)                       | 0·79 (0·67-0·94)                       | 0·53 (0·40-0·69) | 0·98 (0·82-1·16) | VEN              |

Drugs are reported in alphabetical order. Results are the ORs in the column-defi  ning treatment compared with the ORs in the row-defi  ning treatment. For effi cacy, ORs higher than 1 favour the column-defi  ning treatment (ie, the fi  rst in alphabetical order). For acceptability, ORs lower than 1 favour the fi  rst drug in alphabetical order. To obtain ORs for comparisons in the opposite direction, reciprocals should be taken (eg, the OR for FLU compared with CIT is 1/1·10=0·91). Signifi  cant results are in bold and underscored. BUP=bupropion. CIT=citalopram. DUL=duloxetine. ESC=escitalopram. FLU=fl  uoxetine. FVX=fl  uvoxamine. MIL=milnacipran. MIR=mirtazapine. PAR=paroxetine. REB=reboxetine. SER=sertraline. VEN=venlafaxine. MTM=multiple-treatments meta-analysis. OR=Odds ratio. CI=credibility interval.

more  e/uniFB03 cacious  than  reboxetine  (table  4).  In  terms  of acceptability, fl  uoxetine was better than reboxetine (table 4).

Analysis indicated statistical incoherence in three out of  70  comparisons  of  direct  with  indirect  evidence  for response rate (paroxetine-citalopram-escitalopram; fl  uvoxamine-venlafaxine-mirtazapine; and sertralinefl  uoxetine-bupropion) and three out of 63 comparisons for dropout rate (sertraline-citalopram-escitalopram; fl  uvoxamine-venlafaxine-mirtazapine; and sertralinecitalopram-fl  uoxetine).  These  numbers  are  compatible with chance because about six signifi  cant fi  ndings would

|                                                                                                                      | Efficacy (response rate)OR(95%CI)                                                                                    | Acceptability (dropout rate)OR(95%CI)                                                                                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Bupropion                                                                                                            | 0·93 (0·77-1·11)                                                                                                     | 1·12 (0·92-1·36)                                                                                                     |
| Citalopram                                                                                                           | 0·91 (0·76-1·08)                                                                                                     | 1·11 (0·91-1·37)                                                                                                     |
| Duloxetine                                                                                                           | 1·01 (0·81-1·27)                                                                                                     | 0·84 (0·64-1·10)                                                                                                     |
| Escitalopram                                                                                                         | 0·76 (0·65-0·89)*                                                                                                    | 1·19 (0·99-1·44)                                                                                                     |
| Fluvoxamine                                                                                                          | 1·02 (0·81-1·30)                                                                                                     | 0·82 (0·62-1·07)                                                                                                     |
| Milnacipran                                                                                                          | 0·99 (0·74-1·31)                                                                                                     | 0·97 (0·69-1·32)                                                                                                     |
| Mirtazapine                                                                                                          | 0·73 (0·60-0·88)*                                                                                                    | 0·97 (0·77-1·21)                                                                                                     |
| Paroxetine                                                                                                           | 0·98 (0·86-1·12)                                                                                                     | 0·91 (0·79-1·05)                                                                                                     |
| Reboxetine                                                                                                           | 1·48 (1·16-1·90)*                                                                                                    | 0·70 (0·53-0·92)*                                                                                                    |
| Sertraline                                                                                                           | 0·80 (0·69-0·93)*                                                                                                    | 1·14 (0·96-1·36)                                                                                                     |
| Venlafaxine                                                                                                          | 0·78 (0·68-0·90)*                                                                                                    | 0·94 (0·81-1·09)                                                                                                     |
| OR=odds ratio. CI=credibilty interval. *p<0·05. For efficacy,OR higher than 1 favours fluoxetine. For acceptability, | OR=odds ratio. CI=credibilty interval. *p<0·05. For efficacy,OR higher than 1 favours fluoxetine. For acceptability, | OR=odds ratio. CI=credibilty interval. *p<0·05. For efficacy,OR higher than 1 favours fluoxetine. For acceptability, |

<!-- image -->

be  expected  out  of  133  statistical  tests.  Data  extraction and data entering were correct, and we could not identify any important variable that di/uniFB00  ered across comparisons in those loops; however, the number of included studies was small.

Exclusion of studies with any treatment dosage outside the defi  ned therapeutic range and without imputed data resulted in 109 and 90 trials, respectively. The multiple-treatments  meta-analysis  model  was  refi  tted accordingly  and  no  di/uniFB00  erences  in  conclusions  were observed in either set of ORs.

Figure 4 shows the distribution of probabilities of each treatment being ranked at each of the possible 12 positions. Mirtazapine,  escitalopram,  venlafaxine, and  sertraline were among the most e/uniFB03 cacious treatments, and escitalopram, sertraline, bupropion, and citalopram were better tolerated than the other remaining antidepressants (fi  gure  4).  The  cumulative  probabilities  of  being  among the  four  most  e/uniFB03 cacious treatments  were:  mirtazapine (24·4%), escitalopram (23·7%), venlafaxine (22·3%), sertraline (20·3%), citalopram (3·4%), milnacipran (2·7%), bupropion (2·0%), duloxetine (0·9%), fl  uvoxamine (0·7%), paroxetine (0·1%), fl  uoxetine (0·0%), and reboxetine (0·0%). The cumulative probabilities of being among the four best treatments in terms of acceptability were: escitalopram (27·6%), sertraline (21·3%), bupropion (19·3%), citalopram (18·7%), milnacipran (7·1%), mirtazapine (4·4%), fl  uoxetine (3·4%), venlafaxine (0·9%), duloxetine (0·7%), fl  uvoxamine (0·4%), paroxetine (0·2%), and reboxetine (0·1%).

In  a  meta-regression  analysis  to  assess  potential sponsorship  bias,  ORs  and  fi  nal  rankings  did  not substantially  change.  The  cumulative  probability  of being among the four best treatments became slightly smaller for those drugs in trials which were sponsored by  the  marketing  company,  with  the  comparators moving up the ranking slightly.

## Discussion

Our analysis was based on 117 studies including 25 928  individuals  randomly  assigned  to  12  di/uniFB00  erent new-generation  antidepressants.  Our  fi  ndings  might help  to  choose  among  new-generation  antidepressants for acute treatment of major depression. Some antidepressants di/uniFB00  ered  both  statistically  and  clinically. In terms of response, mirtazapine, escitalopram, venlafaxine,  and  sertraline  were  more  e/uniFB03 cacious  than duloxetine, fl  uoxetine, fl  uvoxamine, paroxetine, and reboxetine. In terms of acceptability, escitalopram, sertraline, citalopram, and bupropion were better tolerated  than  other  new-generation  antidepressants. These  results  indicate  that  two  of  the  most  e/uniFB03 cacious treatments (mirtazapine and venlafaxine) might not be the best for overall acceptability.

Here, we did not investigate important outcomes, such as  side-e/uniFB00  ects,  toxic  e/uniFB00  ects,  discontinuation  symptoms, and  social  functioning.  However,  the  most  important clinical implication of the results is that escitalopram and sertr  aline  might  be  the  best  choice  when  starting  a treatment for moderate to severe major depression because  they  have  the  best  possible  balance  between e/uniFB03 cacy and acceptability.

We  did  not  do  a  formal  cost-e/uniFB00  ectiveness  analysis; however, because some new anti  depressants are now o/uniFB00 patent  and  available  in  generic  form,  their  acquisition cost is reduced. Indeed, only two of the 12 antidepressants (escitalopram  and  duloxetine)  are  still  on  patent  in  the USA and in Europe. Sertraline seems to be better than escitalo  pram because of its lower cost in most countries. How  ever, in the absence of a full economic model, this recom  mendation cannot be made unequivocally because several other costs are associated with the use of antidepressants. 138

Reboxetine,  fl  uvoxamine,  paroxetine,  and  duloxetine were the least e/uniFB03 cacious and acceptable drugs, making them less favour  able options when prescribing an acute treat  ment for major depression. Furthermore, in terms of acceptability,  reboxetine  was  the  least  tolerated  agent among the 12 anti  depressants and was signifi  cantly less e/uniFB00  ective than all the other 11 drugs. Therefore, reboxetine should not be used as a routine fi  rst-line acute treatment for major depression.

Findings from this analysis apply only to acute-phase treatment  (8  weeks)  of  depression.  Clinicians  need  to

Figure 4: Ranking for effi cacy (solid line) and acceptability (dotted line) Ranking indicates the probability to be the best treatment, the second best, the third best, and so on, among the 12 antidepressants.

<!-- image -->

know  whether  (and  to  what  extent)  treatments  work within a clinically reasonable period. Clinically, the assessment of e/uniFB03 cacy after 6 weeks of treatment or after 16-24 weeks or more might lead to wide di/uniFB00  erences in treatment  outcome.  In  many  systematic  reviews,  the ability  to  provide  valid  estimates  of  treatment  e/uniFB00  ect  is limited because trials with di/uniFB00  erent durations of follow-up have been combined. 139 A systematic review of clinical-trial data 140 that investigated early response to antidepressants employed a common defi  nition of early response across all  included studies. Apart from this study, however, no systematic review has investigated the comparative e/uniFB03 cacy  of  antidepressants  in  individuals  with  major depression  employing  a  common  defi  nition  of  acute response that includes a predefi  ned follow-up duration.

Most  trials  included  in  our  analysis  did  not  report adequate information about randomisation and allocation concealment,  and  this  might  undermine  the  validity  of overall  fi  ndings.  Nonetheless,  all  studies  on  antidepressants included in this meta-analysis were very similar in terms of design and conduct, and the scant information in terms of quality assessment could be more an issue of reporting in the text than real defects in study design, as it has been commonly found in other systematic reviews. 141

Evidence exists of presence of sponsorship bias (ie, the bias associated with the commercial interests of industrial sponsors) in medicine, 142 and there is concern about the potential e/uniFB00  ect of fi  nancial interests on medical publications. Because most studies comparing the newest antidepressants (mirtazapine, escitalopram, buproprion, and duloxetine) were done by the pharmaceutical companies marketing these compounds, this  might  be  a  source  of  bias. 143 Some  discrepancies existed between some of the results of the multiple-treatments meta-analysis and  those in the direct  comparisons  (escitalopram vs citalopram  and mirtazapine vs venlafaxine). These fi  ndings emphasise a potential  advantage  of  this  analysis  that  incorporates indirect and direct comparisons, decreasing the risk for possible  sponsorship  bias.  However,  limitations  of  the primary trials and potential confounders (such as dose issues)  can  a/uniFB00  ect  the  validity  of  the  fi  ndings.  Readers cannot fully appreciate the meaning of a study without acknowledging the biases in the design and interpretation that can arise when a sponsor might benefi  t from a study publication. 144 Such associations should be made clear to let anyone judge the relevance of fi  ndings.

Placebo-controlled  trials  are  required  to  adequately assess  the  e/uniFB03 cacy  of  novel  antidepressant  drugs. 145 In both the USA and Europe, regulatory authorities require placebo-controlled  studies  for  marketing  authorisation. The selective publication of placebo-controlled antidepressant trials and its e/uniFB00  ect on apparent e/uniFB03 cacy is well  recognised 146 and  there  is  currently  controversy  on this topic 147 Placebo-controlled trials are mainly designed for  regulatory  approval  purposes;  to  meet  both  ethical and  safety  requirements,  they  tend  to  recruit  patients with a mild form of disease. 148 Although placebo-controlled trials can be e/uniFB03 cient because they need smaller sample sizes  than  non-placebo-controlled  trials,  di/uniFB03 culties  in carrying  out  these  trials  when  e/uniFB00  ective  treatments  are known  to  exist  can  introduce  artifacts into clinical trials. 149

Response  to  placebo  across  antidepressant  trials  has been shown to vary and has clearly increased in the past two  decades,  with  a  similar  increase  occurring  in  the fraction  of  patients  responding  to  active  medication  as well. 150 The issue of changes in trial outcomes over time is still  under  debate; 151 however,  the  change  in  placebo response does not seem to be directly explained by changes in study characteristics. 150 Infl  ation of baseline severity, for example, is likely to be a cause for the temporal rise in placebo response rates, which increases the proportion of failed  trials. 150 As  placebo-controlled  trials  of  antidepressants become increasingly di/uniFB03 cult to do, it is perhaps time to reconsider the standard requirements. Our analysis suggests that sertraline is better than other new-generation drugs in terms of e/uniFB03 cacy and acceptability, and could be used as a standard comparator in phase III and also in pragmatic (or e/uniFB00  ectiveness) trials to increase the real-world applicability  of  the  results.  Although  the  sample-size requirements might be larger than in the ideal placebo-controlled trial, the increased real-world applicability  of  the  results  would,  in  our  opinion,  o/uniFB00  set this disadvantage. Furthermore, the need of new treatments to show either greater e/uniFB03 cacy or acceptability than  an  existing  standard  therapy  would  serve  as  a disincentive  to  the  development  of  me-too  agents  that o/uniFB00  er little to patients other than increased costs.

## Contributors

AC, CB, TAF, RC, and JRG conceived and designed the meta-analysis, and GS and JPTH provided supervision. AC, CB, AN, TAF, IMO, NW, and HM identifi  ed and acquired reports of trials, and extracted data. AC, AN, IMO, NW, and HM contacted authors of trials and pharmaceutical industries for additional information. AC, CB, TAF, JRG, GS, and JPTH analysed and interpreted the data. GS and JPTH provided statistical advice and input. RC, AN, IMO, NW, MT, and HM contributed to the interpretation of the data. AC drafted the manuscript. CB, JRG, TAF, GS, JPTH, and MT critically reviewed the manuscript.

## Confl   ict of interest statement

JRG has received research funding from GlaxoSmithKline, Sanofi  -Aventis, the UK Department of Health and Medical Research Council, the Stanley Medical Research Institute, and advisory committee payments from Bristol Myers Squibb. TAF has received research funds and speaking fees from Asahi Kasei, Astellas, Dai-Nippon Sumitomo, Eisai, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Kyowa Hakko, Meiji, Nikken Kagaku, Organon, Otsuka, Pfi  zer, and Yoshitomi. The Japanese Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, and the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare have also funded TAF's research. NW has received speaking fees from GlaxoSmithKline for evidence-based medicine. JPTH has received fees for consultancy from Roche and for teaching from Novartis. All other authors declare that they have no confl  ict of interest.

## Acknowledgments

We thank the Fondazione Cariverona, who provided a 3-year grant to the WHO Collaborating Centre for Research and Training in Mental Health and Service Organisation at the University of Verona, directed by MT.

## References

- 1 Ward S, Lloyd Jones M, Pandor A, et al. A systematic review and economic evaluation of statins for the prevention of coronary events. Health Technol Assess 2007; 11: 1-160.
- 2 National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE). Depression: management of depression in primary and secondary care. London: National Institute for Clinical Excellence, 2007 . http://guidance.nice. org.uk/CG23 (accessed Dec 19, 2008).
- 3 Puech A, Montgomery SA, Prost JF, Solles A, Briley M. Milnacipran, a new serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor: an overview of its antidepressant activity and clinical tolerability. Intern Clin Psychopharmacol 1997; 12: 99-108.
- 4 Smith D, Dempster C, Glanville, et al. E/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of venlafaxine compared with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and other antidepressants: a meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry 2002; 180: 396-404.
- 5 Hansen AR, Gartlehner G, Lohr KN, Gaynes BN, Carey TS. E/uniFB03 cacy and safety of second-generation antidepressants in the treatment of major depressive disorder. Ann Intern Med 2005; 143: 415-26.
- 6 Cipriani A, Barbui C, Brambilla P, Furukawa TA, Hotopf M, Geddes JR. Are all antidepressants really the same? The case of fl  uoxetine: a systematic review. J Clin Psychiatry 2006; 67: 850-64.
- 7 Papakostas GI, Thase ME, Fava M, Nelson JC, Shelton RC. Are antidepressant drugs that combine serotonergic and noradrenergic mechanisms of action more e/uniFB00  ective than the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in treating major depressive disorder? A meta-analysis of studies of newer agents. Biol Psychiatry 2007; 62: 1217-27 .
- 8 Gartlehner G, Hansen RA, Thieda P, et al. Comparative e/uniFB00  ectiveness of second-generation antidepressants in the pharmacologic treatment of adult depression. Comparative e/uniFB00  ectiveness review no 7 . Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2007 . http://www. e/uniFB00  ectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/reports/fi  nal.cfm (accessed Dec 19, 2008).
- 9 Nemero/uniFB00   CB, Entsuah R, Benattia I, Demitrack M, Sloan DM, Thase ME. Comprehensive analysis of remission (COMPARE) with venlafaxine versus SSRIs. Biol Psychiatry 2008; 63: 424-34.
- 10 Salanti G, Higgins JP, Ades A, Ioannidis JP. Evaluation of networks of randomized trials . Stat Methods Med Res 2008; 17: 279-301.
- 11 Ades AE, Sculpher M, Sutton A, et al. Bayesian methods for evidence synthesis in cost-e/uniFB00  ectiveness analysis. Pharmacoeconomics 2006; 24: 1-19.
- 12 National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE). Antenatal and postnatal mental health. The NICE guideline on clinical management and service guidance. London: National Institute for Clinical Excellence, 2007 . http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/pdf/ CG45fullguideline.pdf (accessed Dec 19, 2008).
- 13 Higgins JPT, Green S, eds. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions 4.2.6. In: The Cochrane Library, issue 4. Chichester, UK: John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2006.
- 14 Bauer M, Whybrow PC, Angst J, Versiani M, Moller HJ. World Federation of Societies Biological Psychiatry Task Force on Treatment Guidelines for Unipolar Depressive Disorders. World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) Guidelines for Biological Treatment of Unipolar Depressive Disorders. Part 1: acute and continuation treatment of major depressive disorder. World J Biol Psychiatry 2002; 3: 5-43.
- 15 Guyatt GH, Juniper EF, Walter SD, et al. Interpreting treatment e/uniFB00  ects in randomised trials. BMJ 1998; 316: 690-93.
- 16 Furukawa TA, Cipriani A, Barbui C, Brambilla P, Watanabe N. Imputing response rates from means and standard deviations in meta-analysis. Int Clin Psychopharm 2005; 20: 49-52.
- 17 Cipriani A, Nosè M, Barbui C. What is a risk ratio? Epidemiol Psichiatr Soc 2007; 16: 20-21.
- 18 DerSimonian R, Laird N. Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Control Clin Trials 1986; 7: 177-88.
- 19 Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses. BMJ 2003; 327: 557-60.
- 20 Sterne JA, Davey Smith G. Sifting the evidence-what's wrong with signifi  cance tests? BMJ 2001; 322: 226-31.
- 21 Aberg-Wistedt A, Agren H, Ekselius L, Bengtson F, Akerblad AC. Sertraline versus paroxetine in major depression: clinical outcome after six months of continuous therapy. J Clin Psychopharm 2000; 20: 645-52.
- 22 Aguglia E, Casacchia M, Cassano GB, et al. Double-blind study of the e/uniFB03 cacy and safety of sertraline versus fl  uoxetine in major depression. Int Clin Psychopharm 1993; 8: 197-202.
- 23 Akkaya C, Sivrioglu Y, Sarandol A, Kirli S. Comparison of venlafaxine XR and reboxetine in terms of e/uniFB03 cacy and safety in major depressive disorder. Yeni Symposium 2003; 41: 170-77 .
- 24 Allard P, Gram L, Timdahl K, Behnke K, Hanson M, Søgaard J. E/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of venlafaxine in geriatric outpatients with major depression: a double-blind, randomised 6-month comparative trial with citalopram. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2004; 19: 1123-30.
- 25 Alves C, Cachola I, Brandao J. E/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine in outpatients with major depression. Prim Care Psychiatry 1999; 5: 57-63.
- 26 Amini H, Aghayan S, Jalili SA, Akhondzadeh S, Yahyazadeh O, Pakravan-Nejad M. Comparison of mirtazapine and fl  uoxetine in the treatment of major depressive disorder: a double-blind, randomized trial. J Clin Pharm Ther 2005; 30: 133-38.
- 27 Andreoli V, Caillard V, Deo RS, Rybakowski JK, Versiani M. Reboxetine, a new noradrenaline selective antidepressant, is at least as e/uniFB00  ective as fl  uoxetine in the treatment of depression. J Clin Psychopharm 2002; 22: 393-99.
- 28 Ansseau M, Gabriels A, Loyens J, et al. Controlled comparison of paroxetine and fl  uvoxamine in major depression. Hum Psychopharm 1994; 9: 329-36.
- 29 Ansseau M, Papart P, Troisfontaines B, et al. Controlled comparison of milnacipran and fl  uoxetine in major depression. Psychopharmacology ( Berl ) 1994; 114: 131-77 .
- 30 Baldwin DS, Cooper JA, Huusom AK, Hindmarch I. A double-blind, randomized, parallel-group, fl  exible-dose study to evaluate the tolerability, e/uniFB03 cacy and e/uniFB00  ects of treatment discontinuation with escitalopram and paroxetine in patients with major depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2006; 21: 159-69.
- 31 Behnke K, Sogaard J, Martin S, et al. Mirtazapine orally disintegrating tablet versus sertraline: a prospective onset of action study. J Clin Psychopharm 2003; 23: 358-64.
- 32 Benkert O, Szegedi A, Kohnen R. Mirtazapine compared with paroxetine in major depression. J Clin Psychiatry 2000; 61: 656-63.
- 33 Benkert O, Szegedi A, Philipp M, et al. Mirtazapine orally disintegrating tablets versus venlafaxine extended release: a double-blind, randomized multicenter trial comparing the onset of antidepressant response in patients with major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2006; 26: 75-78.
- 34 Bennie EH, Mullin JM, Martindale JJ. A double-blind multicenter trial comparing sertraline and fl  uoxetine in outpatients with major depression. J Clin Psychiatry 1995; 56: 229-37 .
- 35 Berlanga C, Flores-Ramos M. Di/uniFB00  erent gender response to serotonergic and noradrenergic antidepressants. A comparative study of the e/uniFB03 cacy of citalopram and reboxetine. J A/uniFB00  ect Disord 2006; 95: 119-23.
- 36 Bielski RJ, Ventura D, Chang CC. A double-blind comparison of escitalopram and venlafaxine extended release in the treatment of major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2004; 65: 1190-96.
- 37 Bougerol T, Scotto JC, Patris M. Citalopram and fl  uoxetine in major depression: comparison of two clinical trials in a psychiatrist setting and in general practice. Clin Drug Investigation 2000; 14: 77-89.
- 38 Boulenger JP, Huusom AK, Florea I, Baekdal T, Sarchiapone M. A comparative study for the e/uniFB03 cacy of long-term treatment with escitalopram and paroxetine in severely depressed patients. Curr Med Res Opin 2006; 22: 1331-41.
- 39 Burke WJ, Gergel I, Bose A. Fixed-dose trial of the single isomer SSRI escitalopram in depressed outpatients. J Clin Psychiatry 2002; 63: 331-36.
- 40 Chen ZM, Zhang JH, Li ZW, Zhang HM. Venlafaxine vs imipramine, sertraline in treating depression. Chinese J New Drugs Clin Remed 2001; 20: 109-11.
- 41 Chouinard G, Saxena B, Belanger MC. A Canadian multicenter, double-blind study of paroxetine and fl  uoxetine in major depressive disorder. J A/uniFB00  ect Disord 1999; 54: 39-48.
- 42 Clayton AH, Zajecka J, Ferguson JM, Filipiak-Reisner JK, Brown MT, Schwartz GE. Lack of sexual dysfunction with the selective noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor reboxetine during treatment for major depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2003; 18: 151-56.

- 43 Clayton A, Wightman D, Horrigan JP, Modell JG, Richard NE, Krishen A. A comparison of the e/uniFB00  ects on sexual functioning of bupropion XL, escitalopram and placebo in outpatients with major depression. San Diego, CA: 17th Annual US Psychiatric and Mental Health Congress, Nov 18-21, 2004. Abstract no 105.
- 44 Clayton AH, Croft H, Horrigan JP, et al. Bupropion XL compared with escitalopram: e/uniFB00  ects on sexual functioning and antidepressant e/uniFB03 cacy in two randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled studies. J Clin Psychiatry 2006; 67: 736-46.
- 45 Clerc GE, Ruimy P, Verdeau Palles J. A double-blind comparison of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine in patients hospitalized for major depression and melancholia. The Venlafaxine French Inpatient Study Group. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1994; 9: 139-43.
- 46 Clerc G, Assicot M, Bouchard JM, et al. Antidepressant e/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of milnacipran, a dual serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor: a comparison with fl  uvoxamine. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2001; 16: 145-51.
- 47 Coleman CC, Cunningham LA, Foster VJ, et al. Sexual dysfunction associated with the treatment of depression: a placebo-controlled comparison of bupropion sustained release and sertraline treatment. Ann Clin Psychiatry 1999; 11: 205-15.
- 48 Coleman CC, King BR, Bolden-Watson C, et al. A placebo-controlled comparison of the e/uniFB00  ects on sexual functioning of bupropion sustained release and fl  uoxetine. Clin Ther 2001; 23: 1040-58.
- 49 Colonna L, Andersen HF, Reines EH. A randomized, double-blind, 24-week study of escitalopram (10 mg/day) versus citalopram (20 mg/day) in primary care patients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin 2005; 21: 1659-68.
- 50 Costa e Silva J. Randomized, double-blind comparison of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine in outpatients with major depression. J Clin Psychiatry 1998; 59: 352-57 .
- 51 Croft H, Settle E Jr, Houser T, Batey SR, Donahue RMJ, Ascher JA. A placebo-controlled comparison of the antidepressant e/uniFB03 cacy and e/uniFB00  ects on sexual functioning of sustained-release bupropion and sertraline. Clin Ther 1999; 21: 643-58.
- 52 Dalery J, Honig A. Fluvoxamine versus fl  uoxetine in major depressive episode: a double-blind randomised comparison. Hum Psychopharm 2003; 18: 379-84.
- 53 Detke MJ, Wiltse CG, Mallinckrodt CH, McNamara RK, Demitrack MA, Bitter I. Duloxetine in the acute and long-term treatment of major depressive disorder: a placebo- and paroxetine-controlled trial. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2004; 14: 457-70.
- 54 De Nayer A, Geerts S, Ruelens L. Venlafaxine compared with fl  uoxetine in outpatients with depression and concomitant anxiety. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2002; 5: 115-20.
- 55 De Wilde J, Spiers R, Mertens C, et al. A double-blind, comparative, multicentre study comparing paroxetine with fl  uoxetine in depressed patients. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1993; 87: 141-45.
- 56 Diaz Martinez A, Benassinni O, Ontiveros A. A randomized, open-label comparison of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine in depressed outpatients. Clin Ther 1998; 20: 467-76.
- 57 Dierick M, Ravizza L, Realini R. A double-blind comparison of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine for treatment of major depression in out-patients. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 1996; 20: 57-71.
- 58 Eker SS, Akkaya C, Akgoz S, Sarandol A, Kirli S. Comparison of reboxetine and sertraline in terms of e/uniFB03 cacy and safety in major depressive disorder. Turk Psikiyatri Derg 2005; 16: 153-63.
- 59 Ekselius L, von Knorring L, Eberhard G. A double-blind multicenter trial comparing sertraline and citalopram in patients with major depression treated in general-practice. Int Clin Psychopharm 1997; 12: 323-31.
- 60 Fava M, Amsterdam JD, Deltito JA. A double-blind study of paroxetine, fl  uoxetine, and placebo in outpatients with major depression. Ann Clin Psychiatry 1998; 10: 145-50.
- 61 Fava M, Rosenbaum JF, Hoog SL, Tepner RG, Kopp JB, Nilsson ME. Fluoxetine versus sertraline and paroxetine in major depression: tolerability and e/uniFB03 cacy in anxious depression. J A/uniFB00  ect Disord 2000; 59: 119-26.
- 62 Fava M, Hoog SL, Judge RA, Kopp JB, Nilsson ME, Gonzales JS. Acute e/uniFB03 cacy of fl  uoxetine versus sertraline and paroxetine in major depressive disorder including e/uniFB00  ects of baseline insomnia . J Clin Psychopharmacol 2002; 22: 137-47 .
- 63 Feighner JP, Gardner EA, Johnston JA. Double-blind comparison of bupropion and fl  uoxetine in depressed outpatients. J Clin Psychiatry 1991; 52: 329-35.
- 64 Gagiano CA. A double blind comparison of paroxetine and fl   uoxetine in patients with major depression. Br J Clin Res 1993; 4: 145-52.
- 65 Goldstein DJ, Mallinckrodt C, Lu Y, Demitrack MA. Duloxetine in the treatment of major depressive disorder: a double-blind clinical trial. J Clin Psychiatry 2002; 63: 225-31.
- 66 Goldstein DJ, Lu Y, Detke MJ, Wiltse C, Mallinckrodt C, Demitrack MA. Duloxetine in the treatment of depression: a double-blind placebo-controlled comparison with paroxetine. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2004; 24: 389-99.
- 67 Guelfi   JD, Ansseau M, Corruble E, et al. A double-blind comparison of the e/uniFB03 cacy and safety of milnacipran and fl   uoxetine in depressed inpatients. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1998; 13: 121-28.
- 68 Guelfi   JD, Ansseau M, Timmerman L, Korsgaard S. Mirtazapine versus venlafaxine in hospitalized severely depressed patients with melancholic features. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2001; 21: 425-31.
- 69 Hackett D, Salinas E, Desmet A. E/uniFB03 cacy and safety of venlafaxine vs. fl  uvoxamine in outpatients with major depression. Paris, France: 11th European College of Neuropsychopharmacology Congress; Oct 31, to Nov 4.
- 70 Ha/uniFB00  mans PM, Timmerman L, Hoogduin C. E/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of citalopram in comparison with fl  uvoxamine in depressed outpatients: a double-blind, multicentre study. The lucifer group. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1996; 11: 157-64.
- 71 Hong CJ, Hu WH, Chen CC, Hsiao CC, Tsai SJ, Ruwe FJ. A double-blind, randomized, group-comparative study of the tolerability and e/uniFB03 cacy of 6 weeks' treatment with mirtazapine or fl   uoxetine in depressed Chinese patients. J Clin Psychiatry 2003; 64: 921-26.
- 72 Kasper S, de Swart H, Friis Andersen H. Escitalopram in the treatment of depressed elderly patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2005; 13: 884-91.
- 73 Kato M, Fukuda T, Wakeno M, et al. E/uniFB00  ects of the serotonin type 2A, 3A and 3B receptor and the serotonin transporter genes on paroxetine and fl  uvoxamine e/uniFB03 cacy and adverse drug reactions in depressed Japanese patients. Neuropsychobiology 2006; 53: 186-95.
- 74 Kavoussi RJ, Segraves RT, Hughes AR, Ascher JA, Johnston JA. Double-blind comparison of bupropion sustained release and sertraline in depressed outpatients. J Clin Psychiatry 1997; 58: 532-37 .
- 75 Khan A, Bose A, Alexopoulos GS, Gommoll C, Li D, Gandhi C. Double-blind comparison of escitalopram and duloxetine in the acute treatment of major depressive disorder. Clin Drug Investig 2007; 27: 481-92.
- 76 Khanzode SD, Dakhale GN, Khanzode SS, Saoji A, Palasodkar R. Oxidative damage and major depression: the potential antioxidant action of selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors. Redox Rep 2003; 8: 365-70.
- 77 Kiev A, Feiger A. A double-blind comparison of fl  uvoxamine and paroxetine in the treatment of depressed outpatients. J Clin Psychiatry 1997; 58: 146-52.
- 78 Langworth S, Bodlund O, Agren H. E/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of reboxetine compared with citalopram: a double-blind study in patients with major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2006; 26: 121-27 .
- 79 Lee MS, Ham BJ, Kee BS, et al. Comparison of e/uniFB03 cacy and safety of milnacipran and fl  uoxetine in Korean patients with major depression. Curr Med Res Opin 2005; 21: 1369-75.
- 80 Leinonen E, Skarstein J, Behnke K, Agren H, Helsdingen JT. E/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of mirtazapine versus citalopram: a double-blind, randomized study in patients with major depressive disorder. Nordic Antidepressant Study Group. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1999; 14: 329-37 .
- 81 Lepola UM, Loft H, Reines EH. Escitalopram (10-20 mg/day) is e/uniFB00  ective and well tolerated in a placebo-controlled study in depression in primary care. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2003; 18: 211-17 .
- 82 Massana J, Moller HJ, Burrows GD, Montenegro RM. Reboxetine: a double-blind comparison with fl  uoxetine in major depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1999; 14: 73-80.

- 83 McPartlin GM, Reynolds A, Anderson C, Casoy J. A comparison of once-daily venlafaxine XR and paroxetine in depressed outpatients treated in general practice. Prim Care Psychiatry 1998; 4: 127-32.
- 84 Mehtonen OP, Sogaard J, Roponen P, Behnke K. Randomized, double-blind comparison of venlafaxine and sertraline in outpatients with major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2000; 61: 95-100.
- 85 Montgomery SA, Huusom AK, Bothmer J. A randomised study comparing escitalopram with venlafaxine XR in primary care patients with major depressive disorder. Neuropsychobiology 2004; 50: 57-64.
- 86 Moore N, Verdoux H, Fantino B. Prospective, multicentre, randomized, double-blind study of the e/uniFB03 cacy of escitalopram versus citalopram in outpatient treatment of major depressive disorder. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2005; 20: 131-37 .
- 87 Nemero/uniFB00   CB, Ninan PT, Ballenger J, et al. Double-blind multicenter comparison of fl  uvoxamine versus sertraline in the treatment of depressed outpatients. Depression 1995; 3: 163-69.
- 88 Nemero/uniFB00   CB, Thase ME; EPIC 014 Study Group. A double-blind, placebo-controlled comparison of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine treatment in depressed outpatients . J Psychiatr Res 2007; 41: 351-59.
- 89 Newhouse P, Krishnan KR, Doraiswamy M, Richter E, Clary C. A double-blind comparison of sertraline and fl  uoxetine in depressed elderly outpatients. J Clin Psychiatry 2000; 61: 559-68.
- 90 Nierenberg AA, Greist JH, Mallinckrodt CH, et al. Duloxetine versus escitalopram and placebo in the treatment of patients with major depressive disorder: onset of antidepressant action, a non-inferiority study. Curr Med Res Opin 2007; 23: 401-16.
- 91 Ontiveros A, Garcia-Barriga C. A double-blind, comparative study of paroxetine and fl  uoxetine in out-patients with depression. Br J Clin Res 1997; 8: 23-32.
- 92 Oslin DW, Ten Have TR, Streim JE, et al. Probing the safety of medications in the frail elderly: evidence from a randomized clinical trial of sertraline and venlafaxine in depressed nursing home residents. J Clin Psychiatry 2003; 64: 875-82.
- 93 Patris M, Bouchard JM, Bougerol T, et al. Citalopram versus fl   uoxetine: a double-blind, controlled, multicentre, phase III trial in patients with unipolar major depression treated in general practice. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1996; 11: 129-36.
- 94 Perahia DG, Wang F, Mallinckrodt CH, Walker DJ, Detke MJ. Duloxetine in the treatment of major depressive disorder: a placebo- and paroxetine-controlled trial. Eur Psychiatry 2006; 21: 367-78.
- 95 Rapaport M, Coccaro E, Sheline Y, et al. A comparison of fl   uvoxamine and fl  uoxetine in the treatment of major depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1996; 16: 373-78.
- 96 Rossini D, Serretti A, Franchini L, et al. Sertraline versus fl   uvoxamine in the treatment of elderly patients with major depression: a double-blind, randomized trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2005; 25: 471-75.
- 97 Rudolph RL, Feiger AD. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of once-daily venlafaxine extended release (xr) and fl  uoxetine for the treatment of depression. J A/uniFB00  ect Disord 1999; 56: 171-81.
- 98 Schatzberg AF, Kremer C, Rodrigues HE, Murphy GM. Double-blind, randomized comparison of mirtazapine and paroxetine in elderly depressed patients. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2002; 10: 541-50.
- 99 Schatzberg A, Roose S. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine in geriatric outpatients with major depression. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2006; 14: 361-70.
- 100  Schoemaker J, Gailledreau J, Hoyberg OJ. First, randomized, double-blind comparison of mirtazapine (15-45 mg) and fl   uvoxamine (50-150 mg) in the treatment of depression. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2002; 5 (suppl 1) : 140.
- 101 Sechter D, Troy S, Paternetti S, Boyer P. A double-blind comparison of sertraline and fl  uoxetine in the treatment of major depressive episode in outpatients. Eur Psychiatry 1999; 14: 41-48.
- 102  Sechter D, Vandel P, Weiller E, Pezous N, Cabanac F, Tournoux A, study co-coordinators. A comparative study of milnacipran and paroxetine in outpatients with major depression. J A/uniFB00  ect Disord 2004; 83: 233-36.
- 103  Shelton RC, Haman KL, Rapaport MH, et al. A randomized, double-blind, active-control study of sertraline versus venlafaxine XR in major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2006; 67: 1674-81.
- 104 Silverstone PH, Ravindran A. Once-daily venlafaxine extended release (xr) compared with fl  uoxetine in outpatients with depression and anxiety. Venlafaxine xr 360 study group. J Clin Psychiatry 1999; 60: 22-28.
- 105  Sir A, D'Souza RF, Uguz S, et al. Randomized trial of sertraline versus venlafaxine XR in major depression: e/uniFB03 cacy and discontinuation symptoms. J Clin Psychiatry 2005; 66: 1312-20.
- 106  Stahl SM. Placebo-controlled comparison of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors citalopram and sertraline. Biol Psychiatry 2000; 48: 894-901.
- 107 Suri RA, Altshuler LL, Rasgon NL, et al. E/uniFB03 cacy and response time to sertraline versus fl  uoxetine in the treatment of unipolar major depressive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2000; 61: 942-46.
- 108  Taner E, Demir EY, Cosar B. Comparison of the e/uniFB00  ectiveness of reboxetine versus fl  uoxetine in patients with atypical depression: a single-blind, randomized clinical trial. Adv Therapy 2006; 23: 974-87 .
- 109  Thase ME, Clayton AH, Haight BR, Krishen A, Modell JG. A double-blind comparison between bupropion XL and venlafaxine XR: sexual functioning, antidepressant e/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability. J Neuropsychopharm 2006; 26: 482-88.
- 110 Tignol J. A double-blind, randomized, fl  uoxetine-controlled, multicenter study of paroxetine in the treatment of depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1993; 13: 18S-22S.
- 111 Tylee A, Beaumont G, Bowden MW. A double-blind, randomized, 12-week comparison study of the safety and e/uniFB03 cacy of venlafaxine and fl  uoxetine in moderate to severe major depression in general-practice. Prim Care Psychiatry 1997; 3: 51-58.
- 112 Tzanakaki M, Guazzelli M, Nimatoudis I. Increased remission rates with venlafaxine compared with fl  uoxetine in hospitalized patients with major depression and melancholia. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2000; 15: 29-34.
- 113 Van Mo/uniFB00  aert M, Bartholome F, Cosyns P, De Nayer AR, Mertens C. A controlled comparison of sertraline and fl  uoxetine in acute and continuation treatment of major depression. Hum Psychopharm 1995; 10: 393-405.
- 114 Ventura D, Armstrong EP, Skrepnek GH, Haim Erder M. Escitalopram versus sertraline in the treatment of major depressive disorder: a randomized clinical trial. Curr Med Res Opin 2007; 23: 245-50.
- 115 Versiani M, Moreno R, Ramakers-van Moorsel CJ, Schutte AJ. Comparison of the e/uniFB00  ects of mirtazapine and fl  uoxetine in severely depressed patients. CNS Drugs 2005; 19: 137-46.
- 116 Wade A, Crawford GM, Angus M, Wilson R, Hamilton L. A randomized, double-blind, 24-week study comparing the e/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of mirtazapine and paroxetine in depressed patients in primary care. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2003; 18: 133-41.
- 117 Wade A, Gembert K, Florea I. A comparative study of the e/uniFB03 cacy of acute and continuation treatment with escitalopram versus duloxetine in patients with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res Opin 2007; 23: 1605-14.
- 118 Weihs KL, Settle EC Jr, Batey SR, Houser TL, Donahue RM, Ascher JA. Bupropion sustained release versus paroxetine for the treatment of depression in the elderly. J Clin Psychiatry 2000; 61: 96-202.
- 119 Wheatley DP, van Mo/uniFB00  aert M, Timmerman L, Kremer CM. Mirtazapine: e/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability in comparison with fl  uoxetine in patients with moderate to severe major depressive disorder. Mirtazapine-Fluoxetine Study Group. J Clin Psychiatry 1998; 59: 306-12.
- 120  Winokur A, DeMartinis NA, McNally DP, Gary EM, Cormier JL, Gary KA. Comparative e/uniFB00  ects of mirtazapine and fl  uoxetine on sleep physiology measures in patients with major depression and insomnia. J Clin Psychiatry 2003; 64: 1224-29.
- 121 Yang JC, Kim SW, Yu BH. Milnacipran versus sertraline in major depressive disorder: a double-blind randomized comparative study on the treatment e/uniFB00  ect and beta-adrenergic receptor responsiveness. Korean J Psychopharmacol 2003; 14: 387-96.
- 122  Zanardi R, Franchini L, Gasperini M, Perez J, Smeraldi E. Double-blind controlled trial of sertraline versus paroxetine in the treatment of delusional depression. Am J Psychiatry 1996; 153: 1631-33.

- 123  A multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, placeboand active-controlled, fl  exible dose study evaluating the e/uniFB03 cacy, safety and tolerability of extended-release bupropion hydrochloride (150mg-300mg once daily), extended-release venlafaxine hydrochloride (75mg-150mg once daily) and placebo in subjects with major depressive disorder. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/ Summary/bupropion/III\_WXL101497.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 124  A multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo- and active-controlled, fl  exible dose study evaluating the e/uniFB03 cacy, safety and tolerability of extended-release bupropion hydrochloride (150mg-300mg once daily), extended-release venlafaxine hydrochloride (75mg-150mg once daily) and placebo in subjects with major depressive disorder. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/ Summary/bupropion/III\_AK130939.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 125  A multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled comparison of the safety and e/uniFB03 cacy and e/uniFB00  ects on sexual functioning of wellbutrin (bupropion HCl) sustained release (SR) and fl  uoxetine in outpatients with moderate to severe recurrent major depression. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/Summary/bupropion/IV\_WELL\_AK1A4006. pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 126  An eight-week double-blind study comparing the e/uniFB00  ects of 20 mg of paroxetine to 150 mg of Wellbutrin SR in patients with major depressive disorder. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/Summary/bupropion/IV\_ AK140016.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 127  A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled comparison of paroxetine and fl  uoxetine in the treatment of major depressive disorder. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/Summary/Paroxetine/III\_ MY1043\_BRL\_029060\_115.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 128  A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled comparison of paroxetine and fl  uoxetine in the treatment of major depressive disorder. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/Summary/Paroxetine/III\_ MY1045\_BRL\_PAR128.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 129  A double-blind, placebo-controlled, fi  xed-dosage study comparing the e/uniFB03 cacy and tolerability of paroxetine CR and citalopram to placebo in the treatment of major depressive disorder with anxiety. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/Summary/Paroxetine/IV\_29060\_785. pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 130  Paroxetine and fl  uoxetine e/uniFB00  ects on mood and cognitive function in depressed nondemented elderly patients. http://ctr.gsk. co.uk/Summary/Paroxetine/III\_421.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 131  A double-blind comparative study comparing paroxetine b.d. (twice daily) with fl  uoxetine b.d. (twice daily) in geriatric patients with major depression. http://www.gsk-clinicalstudyregister.com/ quicksearch-list.jsp?tab=results&amp;letterrange=A-F&amp;type=Medical+ Condition&amp;item=Depression&amp;studyType=All&amp;popu (accessed Dec 19, 2008).
- 132  A double-blind, multicentre study to compare paroxetine and fl   uoxetine in the treatment of patients with major depressive disorder with regard to antidepressant e/uniFB03 cacy, e/uniFB00  ects on associated anxiety and tolerability. http://ctr.gsk.co.uk/ Summary/Paroxetine/II\_29060\_356.pdf (accessed Dec 19, 2009).
- 133  Duloxetine versus placebo and paroxetine in the acute treatment of major depression. http://www.clinicalstudyresults.org/ (accessed Dec 19, 2008).
- 134  Flexible-dose comparison the safety and e/uniFB03 cacy of escitalopram and fl  uoxetine in the reatment of major depressive disorder. http://www.forestclinicaltrials.com/CTR/CTRController/ CTRViewPdf?\_fi  le\_id=scsr/SCSR\_SCT-MD-16\_fi  nal.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 135  Fixed-dose comparison of escitalopram combination in adult patients with major depressive disorder. http://www. forestclinicaltrials.com/CTR/CTRController/CTRViewPdf?\_fi  le\_ id=scsr/SCSR\_SCT-MD-35\_fi  nal.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 136  A double-blind, fl  exible-dose comparison of escitalopram, sertraline and placebo in the treatment of major depressive disorder. http://www.forestclinicaltrials.com/CTR/CTRController/ CTRViewPdf?\_fi  le\_id=scsr/SCSR\_SCT-MD-27\_fi  nal.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 137 Flexible-dose comparison of the safety and e/uniFB03 cacy of Lu 26-054 (escitalopram), citalopram, and placebo in the treatment of major depressive disorder. http://www.forestclinicaltrials.com/CTR/ CTRController/CTRViewPdf?\_fi  le\_id=scsr/SCSR\_SCT-MD-02\_ fi   nal.pdf (accessed Sept 30, 2008).
- 138  Le Lay A, Despiegel N, François C, Duru G. Can discrete event simulation be of use in modelling major depression? Cost E/uniFB00   Resour Alloc 2006; 4: 19.
- 139  Zimmerman M, Posternak MA, Chelminski I. Symptom severity and exclusion from antidepressant e/uniFB03 cacy trials. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2002; 22: 610-14.
- 140  Taylor MJ, Freemantle N, Geddes JR, Bhagwagar Z. Early onset of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressant action: systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2006; 63: 1217-23.
- 141 Huwiler-Müntener K, Jüni P, Junker C, Egger M. Quality of reporting of randomized trials as a measure of methodologic quality. JAMA 2002; 287: 2801-04.
- 142  Bekelman JE, Li Y, Gross CP. Scope and impact of fi  nancial confl  icts of interest in biomedical research: a systematic review. JAMA 2003; 289: 454-65.
- 143  Barbui C, Cipriani A, Brambilla P, Hotopf M. 'Wish bias' in antidepressant drug trials? J Clin Psychopharmacol 2004; 24: 126-30.
- 144  Schwartz RS, Curfman GD, Morrissey S, Drazen JM. Full disclosure and the funding of biomedical research. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 1850-51.
- 145  Kupfer DJ, Frank E. Placebo in clinical trials for depression: complexity and necessity. JAMA 2002; 287: 1853-54.
- 146  Turner EH, Matthews AM, Linardatos E, Tell RA, Rosenthal R. Selective publication of antidepressant trials and its infl  uence on apparent e/uniFB03 cacy. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 252-60.
- 147 Kirsch I, Deacon BJ, Huedo-Medina TB, Scoboria A, Moore TJ, Johnson BT. Initial severity and antidepressant benefi  ts: a meta-analysis of data submitted to the Food and Drug Administration. PLoS Med 2008; 5: e45.
- 148  Kirsch I, Moncrie/uniFB00   J. Clinical trials and the response rate illusion. Contemp Clin Trials 2007; 28: 348-51.
- 149  Geddes JR, Cipriani A. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. BMJ 2004; 329: 809-10.
- 150  Walsh BT, Seidman SN, Sysko R, Gould M. Placebo response in studies of major depression: variable, substantial, and growing. JAMA 2002; 287: 1840-47 .
- 151  Sneed JR, Rutherford BR, Rindskopf D, Lane DT, Sackeim HA, Roose SP. Design makes a di/uniFB00  erence: a meta-analysis of antidepressant response rates in placebo-controlled versus comparator trials in late-life depression. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 2008; 16: 65-73.